Create korogenoest (#179)
elixir-europe/infectious-diseases-toolkit: showcase/korogenoest.md

---
title: SARS-CoV-2 sequencing in Estonia 2021-2022
contributors: [Diana Pilvar, Hedi Peterson]
description: Full-genomic sequencing and analysis of SARS-CoV-2 strains in Estonia during 2021-2022.
affiliations: [University of Tartu, Republic of Estonia Health Board, EE]
related_pages:

>   showcase: [COVID19GalaxyProject]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  showcase: [covid19_galaxy_project]
```

Reviewer 2: ok

page_id: korogenoest 
---

## Introduction 

Sequencing initiatives in Estonia began in Spring 2020. The KoroGeno-EST-3 and KoroGeno-EST-2022 projects took over the sequencing activities in May 2021, and their work concluded at the end of 2022. Here, we describe the workflow of samples and data employed by the [KoroGeno-EST-3 and KoroGeno-EST-2022 projects](https://kliinilinemeditsiin.ut.ee/et/sisu/eesti-sars-cov-2-taisgenoomide-jarjestamine-ja-analuus-korogeno-est-1est-2est-3) .

## Who is the KoroGeno-Est showcase intended for?

> This showcase provides a high-level overview of the full workflow that was used to monitor the SARS-CoV-2 situation in Estonia by sequencing a proportion of positive PCR samples in the country. The showcase could be beneficial for a general overview but also trigger potential contact with research groups or health boards that need to set up their automatic data handling and sequencing pipelines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This showcase provides a high-level overview of the full workflow that was used to monitor the SARS-CoV-2 situation in Estonia by sequencing a proportion of positive PCR samples in the country. The showcase could be beneficial for a general overview but also trigger contact with research groups or health boards that need to set up their automatic data handling and sequencing pipelines.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

{% include image.html file="/KoroGenoEst_graphicalabstract.jpeg" caption="The figure illustrates major analysis steps carried out in Estonia to sequence and analyse SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive samples" alt="In Estonia the SARS-CoV-2 sequencing was carried out by University of Tartu in collaboration with the SYNLAB Eesti and Health Board Estonia. The Synlab provided information on the basic sample metadata and PCR outcome, Health Board provided sample metadata on e.g. age, gender, county, vaccination information. The central data storage was at GitLab instance at the University of Tartu. The University of Tartu research groups merged the data, created plate information files for sequencing, collecting the sequencing results, generated custom reports, interactive dashboards and brokered data to ENA. In addition to data sequenced in Estonia, also data from ECDC was analysed in similar manner to provide accurate overview of the situation." %}

> In Estonia the SARS-CoV-2 sequencing was carried out in collaboration with the SYNLAB Eesti, Health Board Estonia and University of Tartu. The Synlab provided information on the basic sample metadata and PCR outcome, Health Board provided sample metadata on e.g. age, gender, county, vaccination information. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Estonia the SARS-CoV-2 sequencing was carried out in collaboration with [SYNLAB Eesti](https://synlab.ee/), Health Board Estonia and [University of Tartu](https://ut.ee/en). SYNLAB Eesti provided information on the basic sample metadata and PCR outcome, the Health Board provided additional sample metadata on e.g. age, gender, county, vaccination information. 
```
Can a link be added for the `Health Board Estonia`?

> The central data storage was at GitLab instance at the University of Tartu. The University of Tartu research groups merged the data, created plate information files for sequencing, collecting the sequencing results, generated custom reports, interactive dashboards and brokered data to ENA. In addition to data sequenced in Estonia, also data from ECDC was analysed in similar manner to provide accurate overview of the situation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The central data storage was at a GitLab instance at the University of Tartu. The University of Tartu research groups merged the data, created information files per plate for sequencing, collected the sequencing results, generated custom reports, interactive dashboards and brokered data to European Nucleotide Archive ([ENA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home)). In addition to data sequenced in Estonia, also data from ECDC was analysed in a similar manner to provide accurate overview of the situation.
```

> also data from ECDC was analysed in a similar manner to provide accurate overview of the situation
What is the geographical coverage of the used data from ECDC? Can it be added to the text?

Author: Specified the ECDC sample info

### The aim of KoroGeno-EST
The aim of KoroGeno-EST-3 and KoroGeno-EST-2022 (hereafter, Study) studies was to sequence and conduct molecular-epidemiology analysis for more than 15 000 SARS-CoV-2 full genomes from 1 May to 31 December 2022 in Estonia. The number of weekly sequenced strains depended directly on the epidemiological situation, including the number of newly diagnosed SARS-CoV-2 cases, as well as the need to monitor clinically, demographically, or mutationally significant strains. 

> Based on the sequenced samples, weekly reports were prepared for the [Republic of Estonia Health Board](https://www.terviseamet.ee/en) (hereafter, Health Board (HB)) and "[European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC)](https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en)". In collaboration with the HB, SARS-CoV-2 genomic data was used to analyze infection clusters to trace newly infected subjects. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Based on the sequenced samples, weekly reports were prepared for the [Republic of Estonia Health Board](https://www.terviseamet.ee/en) (hereafter, Health Board (HB)) and "[European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC)](https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en)". In collaboration with the HB, SARS-CoV-2 genomic data was used to analyse infection clusters to trace newly infected subjects. 
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> In addition, the study identified the prevalence of variants associated with higher pathogenicity or infectiousness or corresponding mutations. Based on these data, authorities got a better overview of circulating SARS-CoV-2 strains as well as imported cases. In general, the current study made a significant contribution to the governmental decision-making process and helped more efficiently suppress the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic.

Reviewer 3: Are "imported cases" here referring to cases coming from abroad?
If so, it might be best to add `from abroad` to the sentence.

Reviewer 2: yes, "imported" in this context does mean "from abroad".

## Metadata and sample acquisition

> Throughout most of the pandemic, SYNLAB Eesti testing sites in Estonia provided free SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing for all individuals living in the country. The free testing stopped for general population in May 2022 and for risk groups in November 2022. Self-paid testing has been available since 2020.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Throughout most of the pandemic, SYNLAB Eesti testing sites in Estonia provided free SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing for all individuals living in the country. Free testing was discontinued for general population in May 2022 and for risk groups in November 2022. Self-paid testing has been available since 2020.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

### Sample metadata

> Initially, at the beginning of the pandemic, all persons testing positive were contacted by the Health Board authorities and asked to provide details of their recent travels, family and work situation, in addition to more standard metadata of age, gender and place of living. This type of data collection was ongoing till spring 2022, after which only more general metadata was collected (gender, age, county). Once vaccination was made available to the public in spring 2021, also vaccination information was first self-reported, and later data including information on hospitalisation was systematically obtained from the [Health and Welfare Information Systems Centre](https://www.tehik.ee). In addition hospitalisation information was provided by the Health Board who obtained it from TEHIK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initially, at the beginning of the pandemic, all persons testing positive were contacted by the Health Board authorities and asked to provide details of their recent travels, family and work situation, in addition to more standard metadata of age, gender and place of living. This type of data collection was ongoing till spring 2022, after which only more general metadata was collected (gender, age, county). Once vaccination was made available to the public in spring 2021, also vaccination information was first self-reported, and later data including information on hospitalisation was systematically obtained from the [Health and Welfare Information Systems Centre (TEHIK)](https://www.tehik.ee). In addition hospitalisation information was provided by the Health Board who obtained it from TEHIK.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> Initially, at the beginning of the pandemic, all persons testing positive were contacted by the Health Board authorities and asked to provide details of their recent travels, family and work situation, in addition to more standard metadata of age, gender and place of living. This type of data collection was ongoing till spring 2022, after which only more general metadata was collected (gender, age, county). Once vaccination was made available to the public in spring 2021, also vaccination information was first self-reported, and later data including information on hospitalisation was systematically obtained from the [Health and Welfare Information Systems Centre](https://www.tehik.ee). In addition hospitalisation information was provided by the Health Board who obtained it from TEHIK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the beginning of the pandemic, all individuals testing positive were contacted by the Health Board authorities and asked to provide details on their recent travels, family and work situation, in addition to more standard metadata of age, gender and place of living. This type of data collection was ongoing till spring 2022, after which only more general metadata was collected (gender, age, county). Once vaccination was made available to the public in spring 2021, also vaccination information was first self-reported, and later data including information on hospitalisation was systematically obtained from the [Health and Welfare Information Systems Centre](https://www.tehik.ee). In addition hospitalisation information was provided by the Health Board who obtained it from TEHIK.
```

### PCR testing
The laboratory of  SYNLAB Eesti carried out PCR testing. They captured Ct values and  particular mutation sites for all positively tested samples. The social security codes that uniquely identify a person in Estonia were shared with the Health Board. Health Board  together with the virology experts from the University of Tartu chose samples for sequencing based on various parameters. 

> In general, the samples were carefully selected to ensure representation of the Estonian demographic and geographic subgroups, with additional samples taken from outbreaks that occurred at hospitals, elderly homes or work places. The data at individual level was linked at the Health Board and sample IDs from SYNLAB Eesti lab and the matching metadata IDs were created. Both the Health Board and SYNLAB Eesti uploaded the data about the samples to an access restricted Gitlab repository. The University of Tartu team received only pseudonymised data. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In general, the samples were carefully selected to ensure representation of the Estonian demographic and geographic subgroups, with additional samples taken from outbreaks that occurred at hospitals, elderly homes or work places. The data at individual level was linked at the Health Board and sample IDs from SYNLAB Eesti lab and the matching metadata IDs were created. Both the Health Board and SYNLAB Eesti uploaded the data about the samples to an access restricted GitLab repository. The University of Tartu team received only pseudonymised data. 
```

> In addition to sequencing carried out in Estonia, samples were also sent to ECDC. The metadata for these samples followed the same pipeline as above. But the sequences were downloaded from dedicated ECDC websites and bioinformatically processed the same manner as the samples sequenced in Estonia.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to sequencing carried out in Estonia, samples were also sent to ECDC. The metadata for these samples followed the same pipeline as above. But the resulting sequences were downloaded from dedicated ECDC websites and bioinformatically processed in the same manner as the samples sequenced in Estonia.
```

> ### Metadata cleaning and standardised

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Metadata cleaning and standardisation
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> The metadata was semi-automatically cleaned and automatically standardised by custom-developed Python scripts. The following metadata types were cleaned and standardised -  age, age group, county, region of country, symptom onset date, place of infection,  vaccine producer and dose  (all applies to data being available).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The metadata was semi-automatically cleaned and automatically standardised by custom-developed Python scripts. Whenever available, the following metadata fields were cleaned and standardised -  age, age group, county, region of country, symptom onset date, place of infection,  vaccine producer and dose.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

## Sequencing and sequence analysis

> Since May 2021 the samples moved from SYNLAB Eesti and hospitals laboratories directly to the University of Tartu Genome Centre Core lab who carried out the sequencing using Illumina NextSeq sequencer. Before, the samples were manually picked out from all the positive tests at the University of Tatu. Based on the sample information and original location on the laboratory plates the automatic pipeline generated the 96-well plate layouts needed to carry out the sequencing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since May 2021 the sample sequencing was moved from SYNLAB Eesti and hospitals' laboratories directly to the University of Tartu Genome Centre Core lab, that used a Illumina NextSeq sequencer. Before, samples were manually picked out from all the positive tests at the University of Tatu. Based on the sample information and original location on the laboratory plates, the automatic pipeline generated the 96-well plate layouts needed to carry out the sequencing.
```

Reviewer 2: Before, samples were manually picked out from all the positive tests at the University of Tatu.

should be University of Tartu.

Reviewer 2: the change is not entirely correct, as SYNLAB has never sequenced the samples. What Hedi meant, was that the samples were transported from SYNLAB and hospitals  to Tartu Genome centre core lab

> The sequencing was carried out using [Arctic3](https://www.protocols.io/view/covid-19-artic-v3-illumina-library-construction-an-j8nlke665l5r/v5) and later [Arctic4](https://www.protocols.io/view/covid-19-artic-v4-1-illumina-library-construction-j8nlk4b36g5r/v2)  libraries.  At times also [NebNext Arctic](https://www.protocols.io/view/nebnext-artic-protocols-collection-rm7vz3rxrgx1/v1T) protocols were tested out. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The sequencing was carried out using [Arctic3](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bibtkann) and later [Arctic4](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.j8nlk4b36g5r/v2)  libraries.  At times also [NebNext Arctic](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bw2apgae) protocols were tested out. 
```
Substituted links with DOIs, please check that they match

Reviewer 2: ok

The raw sequences were initially analysed by the Illumina Dragen pipeline but was moved soon to the Galaxy workflow developed by the Galaxy community led by Wolfgang Maier. The pipeline includes removing the human reads from the raw sequences, mapping the reads to the consensus sequence of SARS-CoV-2, identifying mutations, creating multiple alignments, calling the Pangolin lineages and NextClade clades.  

> The work was carried out at the [Galaxy instance](https://galaxy.hpc.ut.ee/) hosted by the [ETAIS](https://etais.ee/) at the [University of Tartu HPC](https://hpc.ut.ee/). All the identified information on the samples was automatically fetched from the dedicated Galaxy address to the Gitlab repository and merged with the rest of the metadata about the samples.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The work was carried out at the [Galaxy instance](https://galaxy.hpc.ut.ee/) hosted by the [ETAIS](https://etais.ee/) at the [University of Tartu HPC](https://hpc.ut.ee/). All the identified information on the samples was automatically fetched from the dedicated Galaxy address to the GitLab repository and merged with the rest of the metadata about the samples.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

## Generating custom reports

> Based on the report templates provided by the ECDC, reports were filled in automatically  based on the sequencing results. These reports included variants of concern (VoCs), specific set of mutations or deletions defined by the ECDC that changed over time. Similar reports were also generated for the Health Board to consult the Government.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Based on the templates provided by the ECDC, reports were filled in automatically  based on the sequencing results. These reports included variants of concern (VoCs), specific set of mutations or deletions defined by the ECDC that changed over time. Similar reports were also generated for the Health Board to inform the Government.
```

## Dashboards

### Description of the closed dashboard
The data table of all the samples was made available at the access restricted website for the Health Board employees and project participants to provide epidemiological and virological consultations. 

> The database included all metadata provided for the samples, sequencing outcomes and was interactive providing filtering and sorting among other customisation options. In addition data could be downloaded for further custom analysis. The closed website of the project dashboard included also different interactive plots that allowed the users to pick the variables to be plotted (e.g. Ct values against vaccination status, county against lineages), but also lineage overview where individual lineages could be included or dismissed, time frame to be selected. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The database included all metadata provided for the samples, sequencing outcomes and was interactive providing filtering and sorting among other customisation options. In addition, data could be downloaded for further custom analysis. In addition. the closed website of the project dashboard included different interactive plots that allowed the users to pick the variables to be plotted (e.g. Ct values against vaccination status, county against lineages), and also lineage overview where individual lineages could be included or dismissed, and time frame could be selected. 
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The database included all metadata provided for the samples, sequencing outcomes and was interactive providing filtering and sorting among other customisation options. In addition data could be downloaded for further custom analysis. In addition, the closed website of the project dashboard included different interactive plots that allowed the users to pick the variables to be plotted (e.g. Ct values against vaccination status, county against lineages), and also lineage overview where individual lineages could be included or dismissed, and time frame could be selected. 
```

> In addition, for each sequenced plate mutation plots and Ct value plots were implemented to carry out visual inspection as part of the quality control of the sequencing outcomes. In all the dashboards, users could select if they wanted to include data only sequenced in Estonia, by ECDC or both. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To carry out visual inspections as part of the quality control of the sequencing outcomes, mutation and Ct value plots were included for each sequenced plate. In all the dashboards, users could select if they wanted to include data only sequenced in Estonia, by ECDC or both. 
```

Reviewer 2: ok

### Public dashboards

> In addition to the access restricted dashboards, public data on the clades, percentage of all positive samples in Estonia been sequenced and clade distribution across counties, regions and age groups were made available and regularly updated at the [Estonian COVID19Dataportal](https://covid19dataportal.ee/genomics_transcriptomics/).  In order to illustrate the virus evolution a public [Nextstrain Auspiece](https://auspice.biit.cs.ut.ee/ncov/est) instance was set up. In regular time intervals, all samples were rerun to obtain the latest lineage annotations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the access restricted dashboards, a regularly updated [Estonian COVID19Dataportal](https://covid19dataportal.ee/genomics_transcriptomics/) public dashboard was also deployed. It made data available across counties, regions and age groups on the clades and clade distribution, and percentage of all positive samples sequenced in Estonia.  In order to illustrate the virus evolution, a public [Nextstrain Auspiece](https://auspice.biit.cs.ut.ee/ncov/est) instance was set up. In regular time intervals, all samples were rerun to obtain the latest lineage annotations.
```

> In regular time intervals, all samples were rerun to obtain the latest lineage annotations

I am not sure what is meant by this. Is it that existing results where processed again?

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what is meant by this. Is it that existing results where processed again?- yes ( lineages change, get renamed etc. this way all the data was always up to date).

Author: clarified some wordings

## Data brokering to ENA 

> To upload data to [European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/) we registered our research [projects at the ENA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/text-search?query=korogeno-est) following the [guideline](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/study.html). At the beginning we created individual projects for a data batch but later joined many under one. The Data broker generated ENA metadata files using ENA virus pathogen reporting standard checklist ERC000033 filling out mandatory and recommended fields ([checklist](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERC000033), [metadata template](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates)).  The preparatory work for data brokering to ENA was done by a dedicated Galaxy workflow. A typical workflow of extraction of Galaxy results to the metadata file and metadata ERC000033 file generation took about 1h. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To upload data to the [European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/) we registered our research [projects at the ENA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/text-search?query=korogeno-est) following the [guidelines](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/study.html). At the beginning, individual projects were created for each data batch. Later on, multiple batches of data were joined under a same project. The Data brokering tool generated ENA metadata files following the ENA virus pathogen reporting standard checklist [ERC000033]([checklist](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERC000033), and using the equivalent [spreadsheet metadata template](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates)).  The preparatory work for data brokering to ENA was done by a dedicated Galaxy workflow. A typical workflow from extraction of Galaxy results data and metadata submission took about 1 hour. 
```

> A typical workflow from extraction of Galaxy results data and metadata submission took about 1 hour. 

For the last sentence, is the alteration OK and can a number of Samples be added to it? So that the reader can have an idea of how many Samples one would get for the 1hour of work time invested.

Reviewer 2: 1h of data brokering  per plate, each plate has 94 samples.

Reviewer 2: Data broker didn't use a tool to generate ENA metadata files. Broker made them themself, it also gave time to spot any previous inconsistencies, find mistakes and workflow bugs.

last sentence is okay.

> Out of the three different raw sequencing data uploading ways, Estonia used the Galaxy-CLI instance which is a wrapper for the ENA upload tool. The wrapper is [available](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli) along with the [dedicated guide](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission.html) that was [published](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421) in 2021.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Estonia used the Galaxy [ENA Upload container](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ena-upload-container) from the [ENA Data Submission Toolbox](https://www.elixir-belgium.org/services/ena-data-submission-toolbox) to process and submit raw genome sequencing reads to ENA. This container allows for the deployment of a Galaxy instance containing a wrapped Command-line-interface ENA Upload Tool, providing a graphical user interface and reproducible data submission pipeline. Documentation is available in [dedicated pages](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission) in the RDM Guide, and a standalone [publication](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421).
```

Attempted a re-write to make the name of the tools a bit clearer.

Reviewer 2: ok

> Out of the three different raw sequencing data uploading ways, Estonia used the Galaxy-CLI instance which is a wrapper for the ENA upload tool. The wrapper is [available](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli) along with the [dedicated guide](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission.html) that was [published](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421) in 2021.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Estonia used the Galaxy [ENA Upload container](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ena-upload-container) from the [ENA Data Submission Toolbox](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/) to process and submit raw genome sequencing reads to ENA. This container allows for the deployment of a Galaxy instance containing a wrapped Command-line-interface ENA Upload Tool, providing a graphical user interface and reproducible data submission pipeline. Documentation is available in [dedicated pages](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission) in the RDM Guide, and a standalone [publication](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421).
```

Attempted a re-write to make the name of the tools a bit clearer.

Author: This comment should be removed as suggested changes should not be applied to the text.

{% include image.html file="/recommended_dataflow.png" caption="An overview of SARS-CoV-2 raw reads and metadata upload steps (a-d) to ENA enabled by Galaxy. Adapted from [A SARS-CoV-2 sequence submission tool for the European Nucleotide Archive](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421) publication" alt="Galaxy ENA uploader takes raw reads as fastq files and metadata spreadsheet as an input. Then human reads are removed from the sequence data and the raw sequences gets uploaded to ENA along with the accompanying metadata. After variation analysis and consensus sequence workflow execution also consensus sequences get uploaded to ENA.
" %}

> All the sequenced raw reads results were uploaded to the University of Tartu Galaxy instance. From there the data manager selected a batch and successfully sequenced samples into a working collection. Forward and reverse sequences were paired up and run through the workflow of dehumanisation of raw sequence reads (uses Metagen-FastQC). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All the sequenced raw reads results were uploaded to the University of Tartu Galaxy instance. From there the data manager selected a batch and successfully sequenced samples into a working collection. Forward and reverse sequences were paired up and run through the workflow for removal of traces of human genetic information from the raw sequence reads (uses [Metagen-FastQC](https://github.com/Finn-Lab/Metagen-FastQC)). 
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> In Galaxy ENA uploader metadata checklist (ERC000033) was marked and the filled-out template. The runs input format was selected from a paired collection (that was human sequence free), an affiliation center was added, and the ENA upload tool was run.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ERC000033 metadata checklist was used and the corresponding template was filled. The runs input format was selected from a paired collection (that was human sequence free), an affiliation center was added, and the ENA upload tool was run.
```

Reviewer 2: In the ENA uploader you cannot fill any template. You just upload pre-filled file.
So we marked from the dropdown list that it belonged to the ERC000033 checklist and uploaded our file.

> As of March 2023, over 23 000 Estonian SARS-CoV-2 sequences have been uploaded to ENA. The majority were sequenced during the KoroGeno-EST studies (14 251), complemented by 9978 successfully sequenced samples from ECDC. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of March 2023, over 23 000 Estonian SARS-CoV-2 sequences have been uploaded to ENA. The majority were sequenced during the KoroGeno-EST studies (14251), complemented by 9978 successfully sequenced samples from ECDC. 
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> The KoroGeno-EST studies were conducted in cooperation with the University of Tartu, the Estonian Health Board and SYNLAB Eesti OÜ during 2021-2022. The study was approved by Research Ethics Committee of the University of Tartu. The [KoroGeno-EST-3 and KoroGeno-EST-2022 projects](https://kliinilinemeditsiin.ut.ee/et/sisu/eesti-sars-cov-2-taisgenoomide-jarjestamine-ja-analuus-korogeno-est-1est-2est-3) were financed by the Republic of Estonia's Ministry of Education and Research.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
Moving to Acknowledgements section

Reviewer 2: ok

## Considerations in Estonia

- Estonia has a single national Health Board
- e-Estonia and the X-road (e-Identity, e-Health Records, e-Governance) infrastructure allows easy data linking across data sources using the personal identification number.
- There has been previous studies and cooperation between the Health Board and the University of Tartu in virus monitoring (HIV, Flu)
- There were no additional local laws restraining the study

> - While the code of the dashboards, data handling is not publicly available the team is happy to consult researchers facing similar situation in the future. The best way is to send an email to [ELIXIR-Estonia](elixir@ut.ee).  The original [Galaxy workflows](https://workflowhub.eu/workflows?filter%5Bproject%5D=33&filter%5Bquery%5D=covid) adapted and used are publicly available. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- While the code of the dashboards, data handling is not publicly available the team is happy to consult researchers facing similar challenges. The best way is to send an email to [ELIXIR-Estonia](elixir@ut.ee).  The original [Galaxy workflows](https://workflowhub.eu/workflows?filter%5Bproject%5D=33&filter%5Bquery%5D=covid) adapted and used are publicly available. 
```
The link to the workflows points at a filtered search result of workflows. It means that as new workflows are added, the list will change. Is it worth it to create a Collection in WorkflowHub with the workflows used in this Showcase specifically and link to it?

- [Estonian Covid19Dataportal](https://covid19dataportal.ee/en/) 
- [Overview of the SARS-CoV-2 projects (in Estonian)](https://kliinilinemeditsiin.ut.ee/et/sisu/eesti-sars-cov-2-taisgenoomide-jarjestamine-ja-analuus-korogeno-est-1est-2est-3) 
[- Information on how to register a study to ENA](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/study.html)
- [ENA virus pathogen reporting standard checklist](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERC000033) 
- [ENA metadata templates](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates) 
- [Galaxy wrapper for the ENA upload tool](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli) 
- [Submission of SARS-Cov-2 raw reads to ENA in Galaxy](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission.html)
- [General Guide On ENA Data Submission by ENA](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide.html)
- [European Nucleotide Archive Quick tour by EMBL-EBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/ena-quick-tour/)
- [Example metadata template ERC000033](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates/blob/main/templates/ERC000033/example_metadata_template_ERC000033.xlsx )

> ## Team members of KoroGeno-Est

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements

### Team members of KoroGeno-Est
```

Adding acknowledgement section

Reviewer 2: ok

Core team at University of Tartu:
Virology and epidemiology: Kristi Huik (main coordinator of the project); Aare Abroi, Irja Lutsar, Radko Avi, Merit Pauskar, Taavi Päll, Arina Shablinskaja, Kai Truusalu, Dagmar Hoidmets, Ene-Ly Jõgeda, Eveli Kallas, Katrin Kaarna (project management)
Sequencing: Tuuli Reisberg (coordinator of sequencing), Mait Metspalu, Lili Milani, Steven Smit
Bioinformatics: Hedi Peterson (coordinator of bioinformatic), Ulvi Gerst Talas, Ivar Koppel, Ott Eric Oopkaup, Erik Jaaniso, Ivan Kuzmin, Uku Raudvere; Heleri Inno, Diana Pilvar (data managers) 

Synlab team: Andrio Lahesaare, Paul Naaber, Krislin Raus, Kaspar Ratnik

Estonian Health Board team: Mari-Anne Härma, Heiki Niglas, Liidia Dotsenko, Olga Sadikova, Hanna Sepp, Heleene Suija, Jevgenia Epštein 

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

### Sponsors
The KoroGeno-EST studies were conducted in cooperation with the University of Tartu, the Estonian Health Board and SYNLAB Eesti OÜ during 2021-2022. The [KoroGeno-EST-3 and KoroGeno-EST-2022 projects](https://kliinilinemeditsiin.ut.ee/et/sisu/eesti-sars-cov-2-taisgenoomide-jarjestamine-ja-analuus-korogeno-est-1est-2est-3) were financed by the Republic of Estonia's Ministry of Education and Research.
```

Author: Sponsors is not applicable and then the first sentence reads also odd as it describes the collaborations. I put funding information as the subtitle but this needs some editorial discussion

In addition to sequencing carried out in Estonia, samples were also sent to ECDC. The metadata for these samples followed the same pipeline as above. But the sequences were downloaded from dedicated ECDC websites and bioinformatically processed the same manner as the samples sequenced in Estonia.

### Metadata cleaning and standardisation
The metadata was semi-automatically cleaned and automatically standardised by custom-developed Python scripts. The following metadata types were cleaned and standardised -  age, age group, county, region of country, symptom onset date, place of infection,  vaccine producer and dose  (all applies to data being available).

## Sequencing and sequence analysis

> Since May 2021 the samples moved from SYNLAB Eesti and hospitals laboratories directly to the University of Tartu Genome Centre Core lab who carried out the sequencing using Illumina NextSeq sequencer. Before, the samples were manually picked out from all the positive tests at the University of Tatu. Based on the sample information and original location on the laboratory plates the automatic pipeline generated the 96-well plate layouts needed to carry out the sequencing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since May 2021 the samples were transported from SYNLAB Eesti and hospitals laboratories directly to the University of Tartu Genome Centre Core lab who carried out the sequencing using Illumina NextSeq sequencer. Based on the sample information and original location on the laboratory plates the automatic pipeline generated the 96-well plate layouts needed to carry out the sequencing.
```
Updated based on discussions

The sequencing was carried out using [Arctic3](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bibtkann) and later [Arctic4](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.j8nlk4b36g5r/v2)  libraries.  At times also [NebNext Arctic](https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bw2apgae) protocols were tested out. 

The raw sequences were initially analysed by the Illumina Dragen pipeline at the University of Tartu Genome Centre Core lab, then in parallel analysed with the Galaxy workflow developed by the Galaxy community led by Wolfgang Maier and eventually only analysed by the Galaxy workflow. The pipeline includes removing the human reads from the raw sequences, mapping the reads to the consensus sequence of SARS-CoV-2, identifying mutations, creating multiple alignments, calling the Pangolin lineages and NextClade clades.  

> The work was carried out at the [Galaxy instance](https://galaxy.hpc.ut.ee/) hosted by the [ETAIS](https://etais.ee/) at the [University of Tartu HPC](https://hpc.ut.ee/). All the identified information on the samples was automatically fetched from the dedicated Galaxy address to the GitLab repository and merged with the rest of the metadata about the samples.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The work was carried out in the [Galaxy instance](https://galaxy.hpc.ut.ee/) hosted by the [ETAIS](https://etais.ee/) at the [University of Tartu HPC](https://hpc.ut.ee/). All the identified information on the samples was automatically fetched from the dedicated Galaxy address to the GitLab repository and merged with the rest of the metadata about the samples.
```

## Generating custom reports

Based on the templates provided by the ECDC, reports were filled in automatically  based on the sequencing results. These reports included variants of concern (VoCs), specific set of mutations or deletions defined by the ECDC that changed over time. Similar reports were also generated for the Health Board to inform the Government.

## Dashboards

### Description of the closed dashboard
The data table of all the samples was made available at the access restricted website for the Health Board employees and project participants to provide epidemiological and virological consultations. 

> The database included all metadata provided for the samples, sequencing outcomes and was interactive providing filtering and sorting among other customisation options. In addition data could be downloaded for further custom analysis. The closed website of the project dashboard included also different interactive plots that allowed the users to pick the variables to be plotted (e.g. Ct values against vaccination status, county against lineages), but also lineage overview where individual lineages could be included or dismissed, time frame to be selected. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The database included all metadata provided for the samples, sequencing outcomes and was interactive providing filtering and sorting among other customisation options. In addition data could be downloaded for further custom analysis. Also, the closed website of the project dashboard included different interactive plots that allowed the users to pick the variables to be plotted (e.g. Ct values against vaccination status, county against lineages), and also lineage overview where individual lineages could be included or dismissed, and time frame could be selected. 
```

## Data brokering to ENA 

To upload data to the [European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/) we registered our research [projects at the ENA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/text-search?query=korogeno-est) following the [guidelines](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/study.html). At the beginning, individual projects were created for each data batch. Later on, multiple batches of data were joined under the same project. The data broker manually generated ENA metadata files following the ENA virus pathogen reporting standard checklist [ERC000033](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERC000033), and using the equivalent [spreadsheet metadata template](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates).  The preparatory work for data brokering to ENA was done by a dedicated Galaxy workflow. A typical workflow from the extraction of Galaxy results data and metadata submission took about 1 hour per plate (94 wells). 

> Estonia used the Galaxy-CLI instance, a wrapper for the ENA upload tool that is described at [The Galaxy Toolshed](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/iuc/ena_upload/a62c4a11a67d). The wrapper is [available](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli). Documentation is available in [dedicated pages](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission) in the RDM Guide, and a standalone [publication](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Estonia used the Galaxy ENA upload tool that is described at [The Galaxy Toolshed](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/iuc/ena_upload/a62c4a11a67d). The wrapper is [available](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli). Documentation is available in [dedicated pages](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission) in the RDM Guide, and a standalone [publication](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab421). 
```

- [Estonian Covid19Dataportal](https://covid19dataportal.ee/en/) 
- [Overview of the SARS-CoV-2 projects (in Estonian)](https://kliinilinemeditsiin.ut.ee/et/sisu/eesti-sars-cov-2-taisgenoomide-jarjestamine-ja-analuus-korogeno-est-1est-2est-3) 
[- Information on how to register a study to ENA](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/study.html)
- [ENA virus pathogen reporting standard checklist](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERC000033) 
- [ENA metadata templates](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates) 
- [Galaxy wrapper for the ENA upload tool](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-upload-cli) 
- [Submission of SARS-Cov-2 raw reads to ENA in Galaxy](https://rdm.elixir-belgium.org/covid-19/sarscov2_submission.html)
- [General Guide On ENA Data Submission by ENA](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide.html)
- [European Nucleotide Archive Quick tour by EMBL-EBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/ena-quick-tour/)
- [Example metadata template ERC000033](https://github.com/ELIXIR-Belgium/ENA-metadata-templates/blob/main/templates/ERC000033/example_metadata_template_ERC000033.xlsx )

> ### Acknowledgements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
```

The study was approved by Research Ethics Committee of the University of Tartu. 

> #### Team members of KoroGeno-Est

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Team members of KoroGeno-Est
```

Core team at University of Tartu:
Virology and epidemiology: Kristi Huik (main coordinator of the project); Aare Abroi, Irja Lutsar, Radko Avi, Merit Pauskar, Taavi Päll, Arina Shablinskaja, Kai Truusalu, Dagmar Hoidmets, Ene-Ly Jõgeda, Eveli Kallas, Katrin Kaarna (project management)
Sequencing: Tuuli Reisberg (coordinator of sequencing), Mait Metspalu, Lili Milani, Steven Smit
Bioinformatics: Hedi Peterson (coordinator of bioinformatic), Ulvi Gerst Talas, Ivar Koppel, Ott Eric Oopkaup, Erik Jaaniso, Ivan Kuzmin, Uku Raudvere; Heleri Inno, Diana Pilvar (data managers) 

Synlab team: Andrio Lahesaare, Paul Naaber, Krislin Raus, Kaspar Ratnik

Estonian Health Board team: Mari-Anne Härma, Heiki Niglas, Liidia Dotsenko, Olga Sadikova, Hanna Sepp, Heleene Suija, Jevgenia Epštein 

> #### Support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Support
```
